Welcome back. In module two,
we'll learn about one of
the most famous algorithms
in all of engineering; the Kalman filter.
In today's world of
advanced machine learning,
the Kalman filter remains
an important tool
to fuse measurements
from several sensors to
estimate in real-time the state of
a robotic system such
as a self-driving car.
In this module, we'll learn
some of the history of
the Kalman filter and introduce
its basic linear formulation.
We'll present why the Kalman filter is
the best linear unbiased
estimator and then
extend the linear formulation to
nonlinear systems through linearization.
Discuss limitations of this
linearization approach, and finally,
present a modern alternative to
linearization through
the unscented transform.
By the end of this lesson, you'll be
able to describe the common filter as
a state estimator that works in
two stages; prediction and correction.
Understand the difference between
motion and measurement models,
and then use the
Kalman filter formulation
in a simple 1D localization example.
Let's begin with a bit of history.
The Kalman filter algorithm was
published in 1960 by Rudolf E. Kalman,
a Hungarian born professor
and engineer who was
working at the Research Institute
for Advanced Studies
in Baltimore Maryland.
Years later in 2009,
American President Barack
Obama awarded Kalman
the prestigious National Medal
of Science for his work on
the Kalman filter and
other contributions to the field
of control engineering.
After its publication in 1960,
the Kalman filter was adopted by
NASA for use in
the Apollo guidance computer.
It was this ground-breaking innovation
that played a pivotal role in
successfully getting
the Apollo spacecraft to the moon,
and to our first steps on another world.
The filter helped guide
the Apollo spacecraft accurately
through its circumlunar orbit.
The engineers at
NASA's Ames Research Center,
adopted Kalman's linear theory and
extended it to nonlinear models.
We'll look at this specific extension
in upcoming module.
But first, let's talk about
the basic linear Kalman filter.
The Kalman filter is very
similar to the linear
recursive least squares
filter we discussed earlier.
While recursive least squares updates
the estimate of a static parameter,
but Kalman filter is able to update
and estimate of an evolving state.
The goal of the Kalman filter is to take
a probabilistic estimate
of this state and
update it in real time using
two steps; prediction and correction.
To make these ideas more concrete,
let's consider a problem of estimating
the 1D position of the vehicle.
Starting from an initial probabilistic
estimate at time k minus 1,
our goal is to use a motion model
which could be derived from
wheel odometry or inertial sensor
measurements to predict our new state.
Then, we'll use the observation model
derived from GPS for example,
to correct that prediction
of vehicle position at time
k. Each of these components,
the initial estimate,
the predicted state, and
the final corrected state are all
random variables that we will specify
by their means and covariances.
In this way, we can think of the
Kalman filter as a technique to fuse
information from
different sensors to produce
a final estimate of some unknown state,
taking into account, uncertainty
in motion and in our measurements.
For the Kalman filter algorithm,
we had been able to write
the motion model in the following way;
the estimate at time step k is
a linear combination of the estimate
at time step k minus 1,
a control input and some zero-mean noise.
The input is an external signal that
affects the evolution
of our system state.
In the context of self-driving vehicles,
this may be a wheel torque applied to
speed up and change lanes, for example.
Next, we will also need to define
a linear measurement model.
Finally, we'll need a measurement
noise as before and
a process noise that
governs how certain we are
that our linear dynamical system
is actually correct,
or equivalently, how uncertain
we are about the effects
of our control inputs.
Once we have our system in hand,
we can use an approach
very similar to that we
discussed in the recursive
least squares video.
Except this time, we'll
do it in two steps.
First, we use the process model to
predict how our states, remember,
that we're now typically talking
about evolving states and
non-state parameters evolved
since the last time step,
and will propagate our uncertainty.
Second, we'll use our measurement
to correct that prediction
based on our measurement residual
or innovation and our optimal gain.
Finally, we'll use
the gain to also propagate
the state covariance from our prediction
to our corrected estimate.
In our notation, the hat
indicates a corrected prediction
at a particular time step.
Whereas a check indicates
a prediction before
the measurement is incorporated.
If you've worked with the
Kalman filter before,
you may also have seen this
written with plus and minus
signs for the corrected and
predicted quantities, respectively.
Let's recap. We start with
a probability density over
our states and also maybe parameters
at time step k minus 1,
which we represent as
a multivariate Gaussian.
We then predict the states
at time step k using
our linear prediction model and
propagate both the mean
and the uncertainty;
the covariance, forward in time.
Finally, using our probabilistic
measurement model,
we correct our initial
prediction by optimally
fusing the information from
our measurement together with
the prior prediction through our optimal
gain matrix k. Our end result is
an updated probabilistic estimate
for our states at time
step k. The best way
to become comfortable with the
Kalman filter is to use it.
Let's look at a simple example.
Consider again the case of
the self-driving vehicle
estimating its own position.
Our state vector will include
the vehicle position and
its first derivative velocity.
Our input will be a scalar acceleration
that could come from
a control system that commands our car
to accelerate forward or backwards.
For our measurement, we'll assume
that we're able to determine
the vehicle position directly using
something like a GPS receiver.
Finally, we'll define
our noise variances as
follows: Given this initial
estimate and our data,
what is our corrected position
estimate after we perform
one prediction step and one correction
step using the Kalman filter?
Here's, how we can use
these definitions to solve for
our corrected position
and velocity estimates.
Pay attention to the fact that
our final corrected state
covariance is smaller.
That is we are more certain about
the car's position after we
incorporate the position measurement.
This uncertainty reduction occurs
because our measurement model
is fairly accurate.
That is, the measurement noise
variance is quite small.
Try increasing
the measurement variance and
observe what happens to
the final state estimate.
To summarize, the Kalman filter is
similar to recursively squares,
but also adds a motion model that
defines how our state evolves over time.
The Kalman filter works
in two stages: First,
predicting the next state
using the motion model,
and second, correcting
this prediction using a measurement.
But how can we be sure
that the Kalman filter is
giving us an accurate state estimate?
In the next video,
we'll discuss a few appealing
theoretical properties of
the Kalman filter that have made it
such a staple in the engineering field.